EEP 64: Triple-Quoted Strings (#47)
erlang/eep: eeps/eep-0064.md

    Author: Kiko Fernandez-Reyes <kiko(at)erlang(dot)org>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Created: 07-Jun-2023
    Erlang-Version: OTP-27
    Post-History:
****
EEP XXX: Triple-quoted binary strings
----

Abstract
========

This EEP proposes the introduction of triple-quoted binary-strings syntax and
runtime semantics. The main benefit is to allow multi-line binary strings in an
easy way, similar to other languages, e.g., Elixir.

Rationale
=========

One limitation of Erlang today (June 2023) is the ability to write multi-line
string binaries. That said, the main reason to consider this EEP is
[EEP-59][] where documentation attributes can
benefit from multi-line string binaries: the documentation generates Docs chunks
format -- documentation in its binary format-- which saves space and makes the
documentation available to the shell.

Triple-Quoted Binary-String Design Decisions
---------------------------------------------

### Runtime semantics

> Triple-quoted strings should only produce binary-strings. This makes easy to

Reviewer: I worry this may be potentially confusing. Why is `"foo"` a list but `"""foo"""` a binary? What if I want to write a long text but as a charlist instead? Here is [a potential example](https://github.com/elixir-lang/elixir/blob/0872ee5444f257744866a4d4c237057f2d97d601/lib/elixir/src/elixir_parser.yrl#L1237-L1249). So, even though I would prefer binaries, I believe a more consistent option is to return charlists.

Then, for binaries, there are a few options:

1. Write `<<"""...""">>`

2. Build on EEP 63 to introduce `u"""..."""`

3. However, for documentation in particular, the compiler can convert `-doc """...""".` into binaries, so the distinction may not be terribly important

Reviewer 2: Completely agreeing with José here, I think triple quotes strings should produce strings in erlang unless I closed in a binary context, this would be more consistent with the existing Erlang syntax.

Reviewer 3: I agree with José as well, I think it is confusing to use `""""` as a binary. Another option for unicode binaries could be to use backticks:

    io:format(`backtick unicode binary`)
    -doc ```
           backtick 
           multiline
           unicode
           binary
         ```.
Not the most convenient key on some keyboards, but Javascript seems to get away with using it so maybe we can aswell.

Reviewer 4: I like using backticks to mean binary. That nicely solves how to write binary literal strings on one line as well. I think we have a winner!

Reviewer 5: Backticks is interesting because it also exists in Prolog. Erlang's syntax comes from Prolog as we all know (which also has single quote for atoms). In SWI Prolog it seems to be configurable how double-quoted and back-quoted strings work: https://www.swi-prolog.org/pldoc/man?section=string and in [GNU Prolog](http://gprolog.org/manual/gprolog.html#set-prolog-flag%2F2) similarily. 

But, for simple binary strings, isn't a prefix like `b"binary string"` simpler and more aligned with Python, C, Rust, etc. for different kinds of strings?

I think `b""` is enough for UTF-8 encoded binaries as long as the source code is UTF-8 encoded, which it normally is. (If we then add triple quotes for charlist strings, then `b"""..."""` seems the natural choice for the binary version.)

(Btw [C11](https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/string_literal) uses `u""` for UTF-16 strings, `U""` for UTF-32 strings and `u8""` for UTF-8, so `u""` for UTF-8 would be confusing in this context.)

Reviewer: There are currently three proposals for revamping strings in Erlang:

* Adding string interpolation
* Adding a shortcut notation for utf-8 encoded binaries
* Adding support for heredocs/triple-quoted strings

The tricky part is: we cannot consider each of them in isolation. `"charlists"` cannot receive string interpolation today because that would be backwards incompatible. If we introduce `` `utf-8 encoded binaries` ``, if they are to receive interpolation, the interpolation syntax must be reserved now. At the same time, I feel it would be inconsistent if utf-8 encoded binaries (backticks) get interpolation and strings (double-quoted) do not, so I feel like choosing backticks would close the door on string interpolations. Which is a fine decision to make as long as we are intentional about it.

The argument for `u"..."` style is that it provides a general syntax. For example, regexes are tricky to write in Erlang because you need to consistently double escape. A `r"..."` syntax would solve this problem (and we could precompile regexes too, instead of calling `re:compile/1`). We could even make it user-extensible in the future, similar to how it works in JavaScript, allowing a developer to have their own `merl"..."` or `xml"..."` strings.

I am not necessarily arguing in favor of all of these extensions but my point is that `xyz"..."` provides room for growth. Even if we say: we don't want to have string interpolation now, will that still be true in 5 years or 10 years? The upcoming Java 21 is getting string interpolation.

Finally, choosing backtick will also depend on the documentation format. If we choose Markdown, the backticks in Markdown are used for code snippets. Which means that, if I want to write "string:to_upper(`hello`)" in the docs, I will have to surround it by double backticks, like this: ``` ``string:to_upper(`hello`).`` ``` and I am afraid this will frequently trip people up.

---

Overall, my vote would be the following:

1. Introduce triple-quoted strings as in this proposal but have them return lists (this means we don't care about binaries for now)

2. Because `"foo"` does not have interpolation, it is expected `"""foo"""` does not have interpolation either (this means we don't care about interpolation for now)

3. Allow `-doc` to receive either binary strings or list strings and document they are normalized to binary strings

This allows us to side-step the other proposals for now. Then we should discuss if-when-how to add interpolation and if-when-how to add a syntax shortcut for binaries.

Reviewer 6: We can introduce interpolation in all strings, by using an improbable escape sequence: `\(`...`)` in any string.
Then would choosing backticks for binary strings not close the door for interpolation.

Reviewer 7: As a side note, that improbable string sequence specifically (`\(...)`) would absolutely risk clashing with a bunch of regexes though, as a way to match on a parens without creating a group.

Reviewer 6: Yes, but a regexp string is a different animal where I guess you do not want any escape sequences, and therefore cannot use interpolation. Possibly chosen with a prefix, e.g `r"foo\(\.\)+"`.

Reviewer 5: I like that Erlang becomes more Perl-like. :-)

Reviewer 8: > Finally, choosing backtick will also depend on the documentation format. If we choose Markdown, the backticks in Markdown are used for code snippets. Which means that, if I want to write ``string:to_upper(`hello`)``

This will be also problematic with heredocs and fenced code blocks:

<img width="178" alt="image" src="https://github.com/erlang/eep/assets/76071/69f719c4-96a1-4f2a-8fd9-cdc44c1a0570">

(I'm pasting an imagine because I don't know how to write it in Markdown so it renders correctly. :))

I'm personally a fan of code blocks done with 4 spaces indent but fenced blocks are sometimes useful too.

Reviewer 5: @wojtekmach Markdown allows any number of backticks, so if you need 3 backticks, just write it within 4 backticks. Perhaps Erlang could allow that trick too:

`````
-doc ````
Some function.

Example:

```
> 1 + 2
3
```
````
`````

(Note that the above example was enclosed in 5 backticks.)

Reviewer 9: I like the backtick idea, but I'll prefer it to be used like in Javascript, where it permits to do interpolation, for example:
```
Bar = `bar`,
<<"foo bar">> = `foo ${Bar}`.
```
or 
````
-define(BAR, `bar`).

-doc ```
foo ${?BAR}
```
````
Or (why not) single backtick as an alternative to triple quotes using the same idea, the last backtick defines the indentation
```
-doc `
backtick 
multiline
unicode
binary
`

% Single line also a valid syntax
-doc `backtick unicode binary`
```

BTW, triple quotes give more control of the encoding (I don't see any problem writing the below)

```
<<"""
foo bar
"""/utf8>>
```

    -doc """
         Removes double-quotes (") from a given string
         """
    remove_double_quotes(X) -> 

#### Binary-Strings Closing of Triple-Quotes

The closing of the triple-quotes denotes the space (indentation):

*1. Code Example*

    >> X = """
           This text
           has no indentation
           """
    
    Equivalent to: <<"This text\nhas no indentation\n">>

*2. Code Example*

    >> Y = """
           This text
           has indentation
    """
    
    Equivalent to: <<"       This text\n       has indentation\n">>

*3. Code Example*

    >> Z = """
      This text has
      two space indentation
    """
    
    Equivalent to: <<"  This text has\n  two space indentation\n">>

*1. Documentation Example - No indentation*

    -doc """
         Removes double-quotes (") from a given string
         """
    remove_double_quotes(X) -> 

*2. Documentation Example - No indentation*

    -doc """
    Removes double-quotes (") from a given string
    """
    remove_double_quotes(X) -> 

*3. Documentation Example - Indentation*

    -doc """
         Removes double-quotes (") from a given string
    """
    remove_double_quotes(X) -> 

> #### Binary-Strings Errors

Reviewer: Perhaps worth mentioning it also errors when there is a `"""` and it is not immediately followed spaces and a newline? Elixir says:

```
iex(1)> """foo"""
** (SyntaxError) iex:1:1: heredoc allows only optional whitespace followed by a new line after """
```

Author: Since we are still compatible with existing code, and one can write strings using single quotes, we may have to allow code that for some reason is `"""foo"""`, which in Erlang produces `"foo"`. If we use backtick instead of quotes, then your point stands

Reviewer: Perhaps it is worth pushing a deprecation warning to Erlang/OTP 26.x that warns on triple quotes?

An error should be raised when there is text that starts before the closing of triple-quotes, where
the error makes the code written using triple-quotes to have a uniform style:

*Code Example*

    >> Err = """
    This shall be an error
             """
   
    error             

*Documentation Example*

    -doc """
    Removes double-quotes (") from a given string
         """
    remove_double_quotes(X) -> 

#### Escaping Newlines in Triple-Quotes

Escaping new lines using `\`:

To write `\` inside triple quotes, one needs to use `\\`. [EEP-59][] should
ignore the meaning of `\` if inside a code block.

*Code Example*

    >> X = """
           This text \
           has no indentation
           """
    

>     Equivalent to: <<"This text has no indentation\n">>

Reviewer 9: Makes sense the possibility to comment after `\`?
For example:
```
"""
foo \ % Maybe I want to break this line to add a comment about it
bar
"""
```

Reviewer 9: > I think that's ambiguous because `\` is no longer at the end. 

Oh, this is true and makes things tricky.

> Should `\%` be allowed then at the end? 

Oh, using `\%` makes sense to me.

> And, if so, how do you actually know `\` is at the end?

I think this is easy, I've implemented this now based on your idea of the `\%` on [this branch](https://github.com/williamthome/heredocs/tree/feat/comment) of a side project called `heredocs`. That's what the implementation outputs:
```
"foo bar" = """
            foo \% This is a comment and must be ignored
            bar\
            """
```

I don't know if this is a good idea, but it's possible.

Reviewer: My concern is that the last example is still ambiguous with escaping the `%` character itself. :)

Reviewer 6: I do not understand why you want a comment in a multi line string.
All in it should be string content, otherwise it isn't very useful, right?

We want it for Markdown documentation, and Markdown uses trailing `\` for forcing a line break, which clashes head on with using trailing `\` for newline escape.

So I do not know if we want newline escape.  Or any escape codes at all, for that matter, since Markdown uses `\` for escaping things, just as the regular Erlang string syntax, and these may also collide...

Reviewer: > We want it for Markdown documentation, and Markdown uses trailing \ for forcing a line break, which clashes head on with using trailing \ for newline escape.

`\` will escape the new line character. To force the line break, you need `\\` (because Markdown needs to see the `\` itself). So to me it makes logical sense: if you use `\\`, you are escaping the character that would escape/hide the line break. :)

Reviewer 5: Comment inside the string makes the syntax too complex IMO. It's already possible to put two strings side-by-side to concatenate them, e.g.

```Erlang
"foo " % this comment is ignored
"bar" = """
        foo \
        """
        %% this comment would be ignored too
        """
        bar\
        """.
```

Reviewer 9: > We want it for Markdown documentation

Sorry @RaimoNiskanen, I commented without thinking in Markdown.
BTW, we can write comments in Markdown in [many different ways](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/4823468/comments-in-markdown).

*Documentation Example*

    -doc """
    Removes double-quotes (") \
    from a given string
    """
    remove_double_quotes(X) -> 

[EEP 59]: https://www.erlang.org/eeps/eep-0059
    "EEP 59: Module attributes for documentation"

[EEP-62]: https://www.erlang.org/eeps/eep-0062
    "String Interpolation Syntax"

[PR-7343]: https://github.com/erlang/otp/pull/7343
    "Feature: String Interpolation"

Copyright

> =========

Reviewer: Should there be a discussion about compatibility? In particular, `"""foo"""` is valid Erlang today. It is very unlikely, but perhaps worth mentioning.

Reviewer 10: I think this discussion has diverged too far from "what problem do we want to solve" with triple-quoted binary strings.
For me the problem to solve first is "How to write the documentation (Markdown assumed) in the `-doc` attribute in a convenient way. This is a different context from the program code in the same module. The text written in the `-doc` attribute is not to be available for the "program" , it should just land in a "doc-chunk" .

Another separate problem we want to solve is to have a nicer syntax for utf8 encoded binaries from <<"abc">> to something like `b"abc"`.

There are other things we want to improve as well and there might be an advantage to combine them, reuse notation etc. But first I think we should solve how to write documentation. What is written inside the `-doc` attribute is not part of the program in my view it is like a comment with the special property "part of the documentation" and its content does not matter for the ordinary compiler.

Reviewer 11: Maybe I'm missing something, but I don't see triple quoted strings as a necessary prerequisite for [EEP-59](https://www.erlang.org/eeps/eep-0059). Wouldn't the following suffice?

````erlang
-module(z).

-doc "
This is an example module doc.

With embedded preformatted text:

    f() ->
        ok.

And also backtick-delimited text, too:

```erlang
g() ->
    ok.
```
".

f() -> ok.
````

All the formatting is preserved, so it's up to the Markdown engine to interpret it:

````
20> z:module_info(attributes).
[{vsn,[105165884523284496141303209755187911974]},
 {doc,"\nThis is an example module doc.\n\nWith embedded preformatted text:\n\n    f() ->\n        ok.\n\nAnd also backtick-delimited text, too:\n\n```erlang\ng() ->\n    ok.\n```\n"}]
21> io:format("~ts\n", [string:trim(ModuleDoc)]).
This is an example module doc.

With embedded preformatted text:

    f() ->
        ok.

And also backtick-delimited text, too:

```erlang
g() ->
    ok.
```
ok
22>
````

Indeed, stripping leading whitespace could allow for more flexibility when formatting the documentation in source code (so triple-quoted strings could come in handy if/when they arrive), but it doesn't seem to be a must have for EEP-59.

Reviewer: Here is the issue in my opinion. Imagine writing docs for `string:uppercase/1`:

```erlang
-doc "
Converts `String` to uppercase.

See also `titlecase/1`.

## Examples

    1> string:uppercase(\"Michał\").
    \"MICHAŁ\".

".
```

Basically all of the `string` module would be quite annoying to write examples for. But I agree with @KennethL. The issue is documentation. Triple-quoted strings is one of the possible solutions.

    Author: Kiko Fernandez-Reyes <kiko(at)erlang(dot)org>,
        Raimo Niskanen <raimo(at)erlang(dot)org>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Created: 07-Jun-2023
    Erlang-Version: OTP-27
    Post-History:
****
EEP 64: Multi-line Indented Verbatim Strings
----

Abstract
========

This EEP proposes the introduction of Multi-line Indented Verbatim strings,

> *MIV Strings* and defines their semantics.  The main benefit is to allow

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
*MIV Strings*, and defines their semantics.  The main benefit is to allow
```

> *multi-line* strings in an easy and useful, *indented*, way,

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
*multi-line* strings in an easy, useful, and *indented* way,
```

Reviewer 6: I'll go for `easy and useful (*indented*) way,`, which is more according to my intention

> similar to in other languages, e.g Elixir.

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
similar to other languages, e.g. Elixir.
```

Their first use case is for in-module documentation attributes

> containing [Markdown][] or similarly formatted text where *verbatim* text

Reviewer 12: Is `[Markdown][]` expected? It doesn't seem to be valid Markdown.

Reviewer 8: It is. Just `[Markdown]` works too but it might be a GitHub-Flavoured Markdown thing.

Reviewer 12: [Markdown][] < `[Markdown][]`
[Markdown] < `[Markdown]`

^ doesn't seem to do anything in particular in GitHub-Flavoured Markdown.

Reviewer 8: I don't know what the above means but please not that in order for `[ref]` and `[ref][]` to link, you need a `[ref]: url` somewhere in your Markdown.

Reviewer 12: > I don't know what the above means

It was to show you (to the left) how stuff was rendered, but José's reply enlightened me. I've used this pattern before, mostly in `README.md`s, but somehow this just fell odd seeing it today 😄 Must be Friday-tiredness...

is desirable since any documentation text format has its own notion
of escape sequences which will collide with Erlang's escape sequences.

Rationale
=========

Today (June 2023), writing multi-line strings is awkward and arguably ugly.
They may contain escape sequences and have no concept of indentation:

    foo () ->
        case bar() of
             ok ->
                 X = "First line
    Second line with \"\\*not emphasized\\* Markdown\"
    Third line",
                 {ok, X}
        end.

The content's indentation cannot adhere to the surrounding code's
and the `*` has to be doubly escaped to get a  `\*` character
sequence into the actual content.

> In a documentation attribute as suggested in [EEP 59][]

Reviewer 12: Is `[EEP 59][]` as expected?

> In a documentation attribute as suggested in [EEP 59][]

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
In a documentation attribute, as suggested in [EEP 59][],
```

the indentation problem is not that pronounced because
the documentation attribute itself is not much indented:

    -doc """
        First line
        Second line with "\*not emphasized\* Markdown"
        Third line
        """.

The main reason to consider this EEP is for documentation

> attributes, and here not having to worry about escape sequences
> is the most attractive property of this EEP.  But introducing

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
attributes, an not having to worry about escape sequences
is its most attractive property. But introducing
```

> a new string format will also require defining how it would behave

Reviewer 6: Rephrased more or less like you suggested to:
```
attributes, where not having to worry about escape sequences
is this EEP's most attractive property.  Introducing a new string
format, however, will also require defining how it shall behave
in Erlang code.
```

in Erlang code.

> Having a string format only allowed in attributes would simply be

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
Having a string format only be allowed in attributes will simply be
```

very strange and the one suggested in this EEP would be useful

> also in Erlang code.

Reviewer 5: I believe "would" is the right word here. It's conditional, with an implicit if, such as "if it would be included in Erlang".

> also in Erlang code.

Reviewer 12: I saw it as "being implemented" thus my choice, but I agree that if it's not for "now", "would" is probably the better choice. I'll update it.

> also in Erlang code.

Reviewer 6: ```
Having a string format that is only allowed in attributes would
simply be very strange and the one suggested in this EEP
would also be useful in Erlang code.
```

Design Decisions
----------------

An attribute is an Erlang form in the source code
that consists of a `-` token, an atom, one value term and a full stop
(dot).  The value term may be enclosed in parentheses
(which is not very interesting for documentation attributes).

    -doc "  Badly formatted
    documentation paragraph
    /-\\
    \\-/".

> A documentation attribute should have a string as its content term,

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
A documentation attribute shall have a string as its content term,
```

and here we want to use our new and more convenient MIV String
instead of a normal string:

    -doc """
          Better formatted
        documentation paragraph
        /-\
        \-/
        """.

### MIV String Scanner Token

> A MIV String must be a token that the scanner recognizes as a string,

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
An MIV String must be a token that the scanner recognizes as a string,
```

Reviewer 6: Since this depends on if the correct pronunciation of the abbreviation "MIV" is "emm eye vee", "miv" ("meev") or "multiline ...", which is unclear given that it is not an established abbreviation, I think I will be creative and rename the whole shebang to "Verbatim Multi-line Indented Strings", also because the EEP argues that "Verbatim" is the most urgent property.

which makes it suitable for a documentation attribute value term.
It starts and ends with three double quotes: `"""`.

Double quotes, `"`, are chosen because normal Erlang strings use them

> and this is just a new variant.  Since double quotes are used
> a MIV String should, as a normal string, produce a list of codepoints.

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
and this is just a new variant.  Since double quotes are used,
an MIV String should, as a normal string, produce a list of codepoints.
```

> It would be more convenient if a MIV String produced an UTF-8 binary,
> but that would be surprising when using double quotes, and
> the documentation build process can convert the codepoint list
> into the needed binary chunk.

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
It will be more convenient if an MIV String produces an UTF-8 binary,
but that will be surprising when using double quotes, and
the documentation build process can convert the codepoint list
into the needed binary chunk.
```

Reviewer 6: This is conditional, and I argue *against* producing a binary, so it *would* be more convenient, but it is a bad idea for other reasons.

I will rephrase a bit, though.

> In source code a MIV String is valid in a binary so

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
In source code, an MIV String is valid in a binary, so
```

        """/utf8>>

The extra overhead is not exhausting since this we are targeting
multi-line strings here.

As a future expansion it has been proposed to use prefixes
for specialized strings such as regular expressions,
interpolated variables ([PR-7343][]), Unicode binary strings, etc.
For example: `X = u"Tschüß"` for an UTF-8 encoded string.

### MIV String Start

After the starting `"""` only white-space is allowed
up to the end of the line.

As a possible future expansion we might allow a keyword here
that shouldn't be part of the string content, but could be
a hint for for syntax highlighting in the editor.

    -doc """ md
        Markdown content
        * Bullet list
        """.

The scanner does not need to have any special treatment
for the string content on the line after the starting
`"""` except that it should not search for an ending `"""`.

A later step, preferably done by the parser, strips the
characters up to and including the newline from the
first line of the string.

If any of these characters is not white-space,
the parser reports a syntax error.

### MIV String End

All bytes are collected as they are (verbatim) and becomes
the MIV String content.

> A MIV String ends with white-space on a new line followed by `"""`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An MIV String ends with a new line followed by optional white-space and then by `"""`.
```

This completes the scanner token.

A later step, preferably done by the parser, uses the white-space
on the ending line as the definition of the string's indentation
and strips that white-space sequence from every line in the string,
and strips the newline preceding the ending line.

> If any of the lines should not start with the defined indentation

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
If any of the lines do not start with the defined indentation
```

either because the line is too short or if the prefix differs,
the parser reports a syntax error.

> Requiring that all lines must have exactly the same whitspace

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
Requiring that all lines must have exactly the same whitespace
```

    X = """
        X
        """

It is equivalent to:

    X = "" "
        X
        " ""

Which is equivalent to:

    X = "
        X
        "

Which is equivalent to:

    X = "\n    X\n"

But with the suggested MIV Strings the first
code snippet would instead be equivalent to:

    X = "X"

Also, this is valid today:

    X = """ xxx
      X
        """

But according to this EEP it would be two syntax errors:

1. The start line has got non-whitespace after `"""`.
2. The first content line has incorrect indentation.

There are many other similar constructions that also
would be syntax errors.

* It is far from likely that anyone has deliberately
  used `"""` in source code to mean an empty string
  concatenated to another string.
* Most today allowed combinations with `"""` will cause
  syntax errors.  Only a few will have a subtly changed
  behaviour (string content).
* Users can simply grep for `"""` in their source code.
  Causing the same sequence e.g through macros would
  be harder to find, but the worst problem would not
  be new syntax errors (hard to miss), but changed
  behaviour.  And the changed behaviour would be
  a slightly different string content.

> Therefore, it should be very unlikly that anyone

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
Therefore, it should be very unlikely that anyone
```

encounters a real backwards incompatibility problem
from the suggestions in this EEP.

### Quoting of `"""`

In the rules above there is no possibility to have `"""`
first on a line in a MIV String.

This would be allowed:

    -doc """
        A MIV String starts with: """
        and ends with: """
        """.

As long as `"""` isn't first on a line.

It would be possible to work around in Erlang code:

    X = """
        A MIV String starts with:
        ""
        """ """
        "
        and ends with:
        ""
        """ "\""

That is ugly, and it is not possible in a documentation
attribute where string concatenation isn't allowed.

We can either ignore the problem since it is only
when placed first on a line that `"""` is a problem,
or we can use the GitHub [Markdown][] trick to allow
3 or more start characters and matching end characters
so this would be valid:

    X = """"
        A MIV String starts with:
        """
        and ends with:
        """

>         """"

Reviewer 9: I liked the four double quotes idea.
I've updated [my PR](https://github.com/erlang/otp/pull/7313) with this change. Now this is possible:
```bash
1> """"
.. ```erlang
.. foo() ->
..     """
..     foo
..     bar
..     """.
.. ```
.. """".
"```erlang\nfoo() ->\n    \"\"\"\n    foo\n    bar\n    \"\"\".\n```\n"
```

Reviewer 5: C# has this three-or-more double quotes syntax too.

Reviewer 6: @williamthome: Note that the idea is to allow 3 or more, not 3 or 4...

Reviewer 9: @RaimoNiskanen Oh, nice! I'll change the code to support 3+ double quotes.

Reviewer 9: The PR is updated and now 3+ double quotes are supported.

Reviewer: I am a bit late to the party but I like the idea a lot too. This and automatically stripping the last line are elegant solutions to the problems presented. :+1:

in the string, and strips the newline preceding the ending line.

If any of the lines do not start with the defined indentation
either because the line is too short or if the prefix differs,
the parser reports a syntax error.

Requiring that all lines must have exactly the same indentation
characters is a simple solution to not have to define how indentation
white-space (tab vs. space) normalization should be done,
and also seems like a reasonable requirement.

### `CR`, `LF` and White-space

The characters `CR` - Unicode code-point value 13,
`LF` - code-point 10, and white-space - as as defined
in the Erlang scanner today, are handled as usual by the scanner,
except that if the line preceding the ending line
ends in `CR` `LF` then also the `CR` is interpreted
as part of the newline and is stripped along with the `LF`.
This is a convenience for systems with `CR` `LF` newlines.

Other than that, `CR`, `LF` and white-space within the string
is passed through as-is.

This means that the examples in the following text
where a normal string is used as matching reference
assumes that the source code has `LF`-only newlines,
such as:

    "\nX" = """
        
        X

>         """"

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
        """
```

Reviewer 6: Oops!

If the source code has `CR` `LF` newlines that
example instead becomes:

    "\r\nX" = """
        
        X

>         """"

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
        """
```

This is a simple convention that also gives control over
the string's content:

    "\n  X\n" = """
        
          X
        
        """,
    
    "X" = """
        X
        """,
    
    "" = """
         
         """

Note that the following could be a syntax error; too short
multi-line string since trailing newline shall be stripped
both from the starting line and from the last content line,
so the content could be seen as less than empty.
But it is more convenient to allow this as also an empty string:

    "" = """
         """

### Indentation

The rules above facilitates indentation of the content
to adhere to the surrounding code.  The ending line
determines the indentation.

    """
    This text
    has no indentation
    """ =
        "This text\nhas no indentation",
    
    """
        This text
        has indentation
    """ =
        "    This text\n    has indentation",
    
    """
      This text
    has an indented first line
    """ =
        "  This text\nhas an indented first line",
    
    """
    This is a syntax error (incorrect indentation)
        """,
    
    """ This is a syntax error
    (non-white-space on start line)
    """,
    

>     """
>     This will probably be a syntax error
>     since the ending line is not here"""

Reviewer 9: ```
    """
    This will probably be a syntax error
    since the ending line is not here"""
```
IMO this is not totally correct. It's a syntax error, but the shell would wait for the string ending, and in a module the parser would give up, for example:
```erlang
-module(foo).
-export([foo/0]).

foo() ->
    """
    This will cause the parser to give up
    since the ending line is not here""".
```

```suggestion
    """
    This will cause the shell to wait for the `"""` in a new line or 
    the parser to give up in a module, since the ending line is not here"""
```

Reviewer 6: I will rephrase that

for specialized strings such as regular expressions,
interpolated variables ([PR-7343][]), Unicode binary strings, etc.
For example: `X = ~u"Tschüß"` for an UTF-8 encoded string.

### Triple-Quoted String Start

After the starting `"""` only white-space is allowed
up to the end of the line.

As a possible future expansion we might allow text here
that shouldn't be part of the string content, but could be
a hint for e.g. syntax highlighting and indentation handling
in an editor / pretty printer.

    -doc """ md
        Markdown content
        * Bullet list
        """.

The scanner does not need to have any special treatment
for the string content on the line after the starting
`"""` except that it should not search for an ending `"""`.

A later step, preferably done by the parser, strips the
characters up to and including the newline from the string content.

If any of these characters is not white-space,
the parser reports a syntax error.

### Triple-Quoted String End

All characters are collected as they are (verbatim) and becomes
the string content.

A triple-quoted string ends with newline followed by optional white-space
and then `"""`.  This completes the scanner token.

> A later step, preferably done by the parser, uses the white-space

Reviewer 5: Is it really preferable to strip indentation in the parser? I can't see why this shouldn't be done in the lexer. If the lexer strips indentation, the token appears with the actual string content in the sequence of tokens, as with normal strings where `erl_scan` handles the escape sequences.

Reviewer 6: That would be convenient, we maybe wouldn't even need a new token, but having the lexer/scanner strip indentation would mean an extra pass over the string's content, which is something the scanner doesn't do today, so it would complicate the scanner structure.

Furthermore, I suspect that to have a source code preserving compiler (robust parser), which is on our ToDo list, also skipped characters should be passed through the parser to the abstract format.

But there might be no actual strong reasons against doing it in the scanner.  We can start there and see what happens...

suggests allowing not only triple-quoted strings,
but 3-or-more-quoted strings.  Then a start and end marker
can be chosen that is not part of the string,
and any string can be created.  This is a not so pretty solution
for a very rare corner case.

### Triple-Quoted String Scanner Token

A triple-quoted string must be a token that the scanner recognizes
as a string, which makes it suitable for a documentation attribute
value term.  It starts and ends with three double quotes: `"""`.

Double quotes, `"`, are chosen because normal Erlang strings use them
and this is just a new variant.  Since double quotes are used
a triple-quoted string shall, as a normal string,
produce a list of code-points.

It would be more convenient if a triple-quoted string produced
an UTF-8 binary, but that would be a surprising feature for double quotes,
and the documentation build process can work around this by converting
the code-point list (`string()`) into the needed binary chunk.

In source code a triple-quoted string is valid within a binary,
so producing a Unicode binary is reasonably straightforward:

    X = <<"""
        Line 1
        Line 2
        """/utf8>>

> The 2 + 7 characters overhead is not exhausting since we are targeting

Author: I know this is obvious to most people but I do not follow where these characters 2 + 7 mean or come from.
Not sure if you can explain offline or here, so that the EEP has all content

Reviewer 13: The 2 is `<<` and the 7 is `/utf8>>` which precede/follow the triple quotes.

    Erlang-Version: OTP-27
    Post-History:
****
EEP 64: Verbatim Multi-line Indented Strings
----

Abstract
========

This EEP proposes the introduction of Verbatim Multi-line Indented strings,

> *VMI Strings*, and defines their semantics.  The main benefit is to allow

Reviewer 6: @essen: I guess the fitting general feature here would be Multi-line Indented string, that has escape sequences.  The question is if that merits a prefix...

@zuiderkwast: I just wanted to call them something in the EEP that was not too long since I have to mention them many times.  "Triple quoted strings" is a better name, even if they could be "N>=3 quoted strings".  "Verbatim strings" is another possibility.  But if we later add prefixes to make them more flexible, e.g. loose "verbatim",  it is maybe "triple quoted" that is the one property that must remain...

> *VMI Strings*, and defines their semantics.  The main benefit is to allow

Reviewer 6: "Triple quoted" or "Multi-line".  I'd say we cannot take that away from them either. That they can be indented is just what makes them good for multi-line.
